---
layout: post
title: "This Week I Discovered: Tmux"
date: 2018-01-21T11:52:04Z
category: twid
---

Tmux seems like a natural progression from last week's [Vim
Minimalism](/posts/twid-vim-minimalism), right? It's associated with the typical
Vim power user setup. I remember playing with it back when I first started using
Vim as well. The problem I had was *why*. Vim already has panes, what many other
applications would call split windows. And if you use a tiling window manager
like [i3](https://i3wm.org/), you have panes at the application level as well.

[Tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki) fills in the middle ground, operating
at the shell session level. When you launch `tmux` in a shell session, it will
spin up the tmux *server*, launch the *client*, and put you in a *session* with
one *window* and one *pane*. You can spawn as many sessions as you want,
detaching and re-attaching among them. They are independent of each other. Each
window belongs to a session and acts similar to tabs in other applications. Each
pane belongs to a window a controls a particular part of the screen. Like
sessions, you can spawn as many windows and panes as you wish, rearrange them,
and move them to other sessions and windows respectively.

Why is this useful? Organisation. A key difference between my first trial with
tmux some years ago and this past week is that I now have a job and work more in
the shell. Yes, you can achieve this with a tiling window manager, or even
inside terminals themselves. Both [iTerm2](https://www.iterm2.com/) on OS X and
[Terminator](https://gnometerminator.blogspot.co.uk/p/introduction.html) support
panes and tabs. But tmux is cross-platform, and configuration portability is a
big boon if you work on multiple machines.

## Making it work for you

And configurable it is! Read through the man page and you'll see all the
possibilities. Look online and you'll see all the people taking advantage of
that. Perhaps too far sometimes. Vanilla tmux can be unwieldy, but with only a
few modifications it can feel very comfortable.

The most obvious modification is to change the prefix key. This is the key you
need to tap before most tmux keyboard shortcuts, to prevent conflicts with child
processes. By default it's mapped to `Ctrl-B`. Many recommend mapping it to
`Ctrl-A`, which matches the prefix key for [GNU
Screen](https://www.gnu.org/software/screen/), a much older terminal
multiplexer. I don't recommend this because it conflicts with Vim's number
incrementation. Maybe that's okay because it's not the most common of
keystrokes, but [`Ctrl-S` is free](http://vim.wikia.com/wiki/Unused_keys)! Given
it's just one more key over I think this binding makes far more sense. Time will
tell.

If you're playing around with your config, adding a mapping that calls
`source-file` with your config as an argument is invaluable so that you can
quickly test out changes. Adding more vi-like pane-selection mappings is useful,
as is more vi-like copy-mode behaviour like explained
[here](https://sanctum.geek.nz/arabesque/vi-mode-in-tmux/). A particularly great
mapping is window reordering. I'm surprised this isn't in more configs online
because it's insanely good! I found it in [this answer on
superuser](https://superuser.com/a/552493), but tweaked it so that it supports
repeated keys and forces you to use the prefix key.

```conf
bind-key -r S-Left swap-window -t -
bind-key -r S-Right swap-window -t +
```

Otherwise I try to keep other mappings and remappings to a minimum. Many suggest
to remap the window split commands, like remapping a horizontal split from
`<prefix>%` to `<prefix>|`, but I find the visual association unnecessary. I've
only been using tmux for a week and have already gotten used to the default.

In a similar vain, I've kept my status bar minimal. It only contains the session
name and the window list. The current window is highlighted and activity in an
inactive window causes the window index display to change colour. It's clean and
out of the way.

The remainder of my config is specifying consistent colours across the status
bar, pane borders, pane information display and clock. Yes, you can press
`<prefix> T` to get a full-pane clock display! Another reason it doesn't need to
be in the status bar. Enabling `renumber-windows` is useful if you have large
sessions with short-lived windows. Changing `base-index` and `pane-base-index`
to 1 will make it easier to select them with the number keys, rather than
reaching over for `0`. I've also set the status bar to appear to top because it
can get pretty cluttered down south when vim is also running.

## Notice your habits

Keegan Lowenstein wrote a great [blog
post](https://blog.bugsnag.com/tmux-and-vim/) on Vim integration with tmux. One
the tools he mentioned is [vimux](https://github.com/benmills/vimux), a Vim
plugin that allows you to interact with tmux from inside Vim. This is next on my
list of things to play around with. Vim already has pretty good shell
integration, so I'm sceptical, but his example of the edit-test-repeat loop and
how vimux can help with it is pretty convincing.

If you have a similar workflow that is as common, then by all means you should
make it easier to perform. Tools like vimux can help, as can a better
understanding of tmux. Maybe down the road you notice it would be great to
always have on-screen vision on the output of a particular shell process. Tmux
supports this out of the box and you can easily add that to the status bar.

The week wasn't entirely smooth sailing. I've had trouble getting user-defined
options working. These are options that are prefixed with `@`. I want to keep my
colour scheme consistent in the file so declaring a custom option would be
ideal. It could also be interesting to only show the status bar when the prefix
key is pressed, and make it vanish again when the subsequent key is pressed.
This seems pretty difficult with tmux alone, but I'm sure it's possible through
shell scripting. After all, the status bar can be toggled in this way.

It can pay off in the long run to keep the configs for new tools small to begin
with. Only use what you know will give you benefit and add more as time goes by
and you discover new things. It's much easier to maintain when you've added
every line for a reason!

*Closing tip*: use `<prefix> Z`! This *zooms* the active pane to take up the
full size of its containing window. Use the same binding to revert the original
layout. It's great for temporarily getting the big picture if you're working on
a smaller screen.
