---
title: "Five Months into the Hacker's Diet"
date: 2018-01-25T09:35:25Z
categories: ["Health"]
---

I've always had weight problems. Only in recent years has it gotten under
control and landed me comfortably in the overweight category, like I was last
summer. It wasn't life threatening but it wasn't ideal either. For the most part
it was stable, and I was stable living with it. Yet it only took one comment
from a work colleague, one with harmless intention, to change my mind on that.

Sometime in early August, I same across the [Hacker's
Diet](http://www.fourmilab.ch/hackdiet/) and finished it within a week or two.
You can find the full text available online. The book is directed towards
engineers and approaches the human body like a machine, one with inputs and
outputs. A machine that you can tune to get the results you want. It's quite
contrary to other diet books that suggest slow and methodical lifestyle changes.
Instead it asks you to measure everything, monitor consistently, and reassess
constantly with the information you have. It's a feedback loop that, so far, has
been effective.

## The Eat Watch

The eat watch is the centrepiece introduced in the book. The premise is that
some of us are predispositioned to eat more (or less) than our body needs
because we don't receive the "full" (or "hungry") signal in time, or at all. The
eat watch is an imaginary accessory that lights up when you should eat and turns
off when you shouldn't. Hence, you're relying on your watch rather than your
body for the information.

In reality, the eat watch manifests itself in calorie counting and eating
prepared meals. The goal is to count everything. As noted in the book, eating a
few slices of cheese in the evenings can amount to a weight gain of 0.6
kilograms per month. Being aware of seemingly-inconsequential snack-eating is
very powerful.  If you monitor *everything* then you don't need to think about
if you're overeating or undereating.

I monitored calorie intake with prepared meals. Thankfully I don't get bored of
eating the same food day in and day out. If you do, that's okay too.  You just
need to be aware of the calorie contents of the different meals.  Averaging them
over the weak may help ease calculations. All you need are the daily totals of
your calorie intake, and weekly if you want to plot trends.

## Burning fat by undereating

This is controversial. Every single friend, family member and
physician/nutritionist/personal trainer I have ever spoken to has recommended
against this. They say that going under your recommended calorie intake by any
significant amount will force your body into "starvation mode" and that once you
stop you will put all the weight back on, because your metabolism will be so
slow. On top of that, you'll be miserable, unproductive at work, always tired,
and unable to get results from exercise.

I have found most of this to be untrue. Let me clarify what my significant
amount was. I'm a 179cm-tall 24-year-old male. From online research, talks with
nutritionists, and my own experimentation, I should be eating around 2400
calories per day to maintain my weight. Instead, I was 1600 calories some days
and 1200 calories other days, by skipping dinner, during the peak of this diet.

This, in my opinion, is the best lesson in this book. I never would have dared
attempt a calorie deficit that large prior to reading it. The experience was not
nearly as bad as people suggest. I was not miserable, because I was working
towards a goal that was important to me, and I was never at risk of feeling
guilty from eating. I didn't feel less productive at work and nobody every
confronted me about it. I was no more tired than usual, sometimes less so, which
I put down to not feeling as bloated.

Maintaining your metabolism is tricky and you need to be careful. Thankfully the
book introduces a plan for that as well.

## The Five Basic Exercises

Back in the 1950s, the Royal Canadian Air Force developed a training regime for
pilots stationed on remote air bases that wouldn't have had access to gym
equipment. The regime needed to rely exclusively on bodyweight exercises and be
able to keep someone in optimal condition in minimal workout time. The regime
was called *5BX* and you can find the plan
[online](http://fit450.com/HTML/5BX_Intro.html).

The book contains its own plan modelled after 5BX, but I decided to stick with
the original. I think the details of the plan are less important than just
*doing exercise regularly*, preferably everyday. 5BX can be completed in 11
minutes. I did it every morning just after waking up. On top of that, I went to
the gym on Saturdays and Sundays and do cardio and weights. With that level of
activity, my metabolism had a hard time slowing down.

## Results

The best test for a slow metabolism is the holiday season! I stopped heading to
the gym around mid-December, but I continued with my 5BX workout everyday. And I
was eating whatever I wanted. Granted, I wasn't reckless, and rarely went over
3000 calories on a given day, but I stopped following my eating plan and relaxed
my constraints on the types of food I was allowed. Cake, crumble and cranberry
sauce were all on the table.

This was a conscious choice. When I started the plan back in August, I was about
87 kilograms. I wanted to be 72 kilograms, which seemed like a good weight for
my height and build. I decided to aim for that by Christmas. I was aware that
this goal was ridiculously ambitious but worked towards it anyway. I needed to
lose 15 kilograms and that would give me about 15 weeks to do it. One kilogram
of body fat is equivalent to 7700 calories, meaning I would need to have a daily
calorie deficit of 1100 calories, so a daily calorie intake of 1300 calories on
average.  If I had a perfect run, that is certainly possible to hit.

{{% center %}}
![Hacker's Diet Five Months In Results](/images/hackers_diet_five_months.png)
{{% /center %}}

I didn't hit it, but I made a big dent. This is a plot of my progress. The blue
line is my actual weight as recorded every morning. I started the eating plan in
mid-August and started weight measurements on the 27th of August. The two
periods of flat recordings in late September and late November are when I was on
vacation and didn't have access to a weighing scale. The red line is an
exponentially smoothed moving average with 10% smoothing. Provided the red line
is declining, weight is decreasing. The red line helps smooth out the variance
present in daily weight measurements and is meant to represent the true weight.

My weight certainly went up in December, but the amount was marginal. Once
January came around, I quickly recovered from it. I'm confident that the weight
increase was down to increased food intake, not a change in my metabolism. I
started back at the gym on weekends in early January and was able to perform at
the same level on weights, and near the same level on cardio. I certainly felt
my chest got weaker over the holiday period because I wasn't running, but don't
think I lost much muscle mass. I put that down to 5BX, which in many ways saved
Christmas!

## Losing that final third

Maybe I should be 72 kilograms, maybe not. I still think there is potential in
this plan, but I am now firmly in the period of diminishing returns. My BMI
shifted from the middle of the *overweight* category to the upper part of the
*healthy* weight category during this chapter of the journey so I definitely
consider it a success and perhaps even complete.

Perhaps for the first time, weight is not the goal. I have began looking into
body weight strength training in greater depth. 5BX gave me a different way to
measure strength training that I didn't have before, namely the number of reps I
can do. It's a different mindset to using exercise machines where the weight can
be arbitrarily adjusted to be challenging. Sure it feels good to be able to
chest press more weight, but being able to do just one more press-up has given
me more satisfaction.

The recent [Work It Out](https://www.humblebundle.com/books/work-it-out-books)
Humble Bundle contains a lot of food for thought. Included were a few body
weight strength training books, diet books and mindfulness books. I've began
reading *Body Weight Strength Training*, which contains a workout plan in a
similar vain to *5BX* but across 40 different exercises. I've spent the last few
weeks getting used to them all. Now that I'm a healthy weight, I want to focus
on building functional strength rather than weight loss. There is a lot to think
about where to go from here, but I'm happy about the progress made thus far.
