---
title: "This Week I Discovered: RSS"
date: 2018-01-06T15:47:26Z
draft: true
---

This is actually a rediscovery. A colleague was telling me about
[Feedly](https://feedly.com/) back during my first job in 2013. I didn't
generally follow the news back then, let alone specific blogs. About the only
content I wanted to keep up to date with was AAA video games, best served by
larger publications on their own websites because I preferred video content.
Feedly, and other *news aggregators*, seemed obscure and only for those stuck
in the bygone age of plain text news delivery.

Times have changed. My interests are broader. The only time I'm able to peruse
the news is typically when commuting or on the weekends. Most of all, I want
targetted news. Given the additional web presence you have when you start a blog,
I'm keener to see what others are up to as well =] RSS is perfect for this. RSS
is a web syntication format that the vast majority of content publishers and
blogs support. A URL they provide gives you access to their feed in a client of
your choice.

Most clients these days are smart enough to detect the content format. For
example, Feedly doubles as a podcast player. CLI RSS readers like
[Newsboat](https://newsboat.org/) and [Canto](https://codezen.org/canto-ng/)
facilitate opening an article in a browser easily if it contains more than plain
text. Most are very flexible, supporting things like keyword filters and
changing the order feeds are displayed.

The key thing is that you control the content you want to see. I went through
the phase of using social media for updates. The feeds are endless. The content
is tailored to you based on some initial preferences you supply and then the
algorithm takes over. Most articles will at least contain something interesting.
In a few, you may actually learn something of value. But it's not efficient.

So I moved on Hacker News, which I know *many* people find perfectly sufficient.
It's also an endless feed though. I found myself sifting down into the triple
digits on some commutes trying to find something to distract me. It's very good
at that. Almost every article I ever opened fell into a category matching my
interests. It made me realise that I was spending as much time, if not more,
searching for content rather than learning from it.

Now I have a just a few feeds set up in Feedly. I can fine tune it to sources
that I find interesting. That's an ongoing process and one that is far from
being optimal yet. But it means that when I check Feedly, there's a much higher
chance I'll learn rather than sift. I've purposely chosen feeds that post
between a few times a day to a few times per week, so that I can look forward to
a steady stream of new content every morning. As I discover more feeds, this may
become too frequent, and I'll readjust if necessary. Having that level of
control is a real asset. Once I've read through everything, I feel confident
that I've "caught up". I can then focus on other things, like writing!

It's not perfect. There are topics out there that could be my next passion but
are completely off my radar, hidden on the other side of the Internet. Locating
such topics is hard, but prove incredibly fruitful when you do! For that reason,
I still check Hacker News occasionally, but limit myself to the top stories.
There's feeds specifically tailored for top Hacker News stories which I plan to
look into.

I'm still on the hunt for feeds. Some that have proved worthwhile subscriptions
in the last week are the [Trello blog](https://blog.trello.com/), various
[Gamasutra blogs](https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/),
[Opensource.com](https://opensource.com/) and, of course, [This Week in
Rust](https://this-week-in-rust.org/)! I can't wait to discover what else is out
there!
